THIRD SECTION

CASE OF LOUKILI v. THE NETHERLANDS

(Application no. 57766/19)

JUDGMENT

Art 8 • Expulsion • Family life • Revocation of residence permit of
long-term settled migrant of Moroccan nationality and a ten-year entry
ban due to repeated convictions for serious drug-related offences • Risk
of reoffending • Lack of proper substantiation of interaction with his
minor children who lived with their mother • Limited yet sufficient ties
with Morocco to build a new life there • No obstacles to maintaining
contact with his children • Limited duration of ban • Proportionality
duly assessed by domestic courts in light of Court’s case-law • Margin
of appreciation not overstepped

STRASBOURG

11 April 2023

This judgment will become final in the circumstances set out in Article
44 § 2 of the Convention. It may be subject to editorial revision.

In the case of Loukili v. the Netherlands,

The European Court of Human Rights (Third Section), sitting as a Chamber
composed of:

Pere Pastor Vilanova, President,
Georgios A. Serghides,
Jolien Schukking,
Darian Pavli,
Peeter Roosma,
Ioannis Ktistakis,
Andreas Zünd, judges,
and Milan Blaško, Section Registrar,

Having regard to:

the application (no. 57766/19) against the Kingdom of the Netherlands
lodged with the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”)
by a Moroccan national, Mr Farid Loukili (“the applicant”), on 30
October 2019;

the decision to give notice to the Government of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands (“the Government”) of the complaint concerning Article 8 of
the Convention;

the parties’ observations;

Having deliberated in private on 14 March 2023,

Delivers the following judgment, which was adopted on that date:

INTRODUCTION

1.  The case concerns the applicant’s allegation of an unjustified
interference with his right to respect for his family life as a result
of decisions to revoke his residence permit and to impose an entry ban
on him.

THE FACTS

2.  The applicant was born in 1978 and lives in Rotterdam. He was
represented before the Court by Mr C.H.M. Geraedts, a lawyer practising
in Heerlen.

3.  The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms B. Koopman, of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

4.  The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be
summarised as follows.

.  The applicant lived in Morocco until he left for the Netherlands in
1981, together with his mother and siblings, to join his father. After
he was registered in the Municipal Personal Records Database
(Gemeentelijke basisadministratie persoonsgegevens) in January 1982, the
applicant initially resided lawfully as a dependent family member. From
1993 to 2001 the applicant had a temporary residence permit
(verblijfsvergunning regulier voor bepaalde tijd).

.  On 29 February 2000 the applicant was convicted of intentional
possession of cocaine and heroin. A forty-hour community service order
(taakstraf) was imposed on him.

.  On 5 December 2001 he received a residence permit of indefinite
duration (verblijfsvergunning regulier voor onbepaalde tijd) under
section 20 of the Aliens Act 2000 (Vreemdelingenwet 2000).

8.  From 2002 until an unknown date, the applicant was in a relationship
with a Dutch national. Two sons were born to the couple in August 2008
and February 2014. The applicant was in pre-trial detention when his
youngest child was born. The children live with their mother and have
Dutch nationality. The applicant has acknowledged (erkend) his paternity
of only the youngest child. It does not appear from the case file that
the applicant has ever cohabited with the children and their mother.

9.  On three separate occasions between 2004 and 2012 the applicant was
convicted of intentional possession of cocaine and heroin, assault,
intentional and unlawful destruction of property, and intentional
handling of stolen goods. For those crimes (misdrijven) he was sentenced
to two weeks’ imprisonment (of which one week was suspended), one week’s
imprisonment and partial enforcement of the aforementioned suspended
sentence, and fifty hours’ community service (in lieu of which the
applicant served twenty-five days’ detention) respectively.

.  On 18 February 2014 a full-bench (meervoudige kamer) of the
criminal-law chamber of the Maastricht Regional Court (rechtbank)
convicted the applicant of complicity (medeplegen) in multiple acts of
intentionally selling cocaine and heroin and intentionally possessing
4.6 grams of cocaine and 35.5 grams of heroin. Noting that hard drugs
posed a grave danger to public health and caused harm to society, and
that drug trafficking and use was often accompanied by other forms of
(serious) crime, the court sentenced him to twelve months’ imprisonment,
of which two months were suspended, with a two-year probation period.

11.  On 31 January 2017 a full-bench of the criminal-law chamber of the
Maastricht Regional Court convicted the applicant of intentional
possession of 500 grams of cocaine, committed in October 2016.
Considering the commercial quantity (handelshoeveelheid) of the drugs
and other indications of his involvement in drug dealing – such as
related modifications to his car and his previous conviction of
18 February 2014 – and the fact that hard drugs posed grave danger to
public health and that drug use was often accompanied by crime and other
harm to society, the court sentenced the applicant to five months’
imprisonment and declared his car forfeit (verbeurd).

12.  On 22 June 2017 the applicant was notified that in view of his
criminal convictions, the Deputy Minister of Security and Justice
(Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie) intended to revoke the
applicant’s residence permit, to issue a return decision
(terugkeerbesluit) and to impose an entry ban (inreisverbod) on him for
a period of ten years. The applicant was given the opportunity to submit
written comments (zienswijze) to this notification of intent within four
weeks.

13.  In his written comments the applicant asserted that his residence
permit should not be revoked, as this would separate him from his two
sons, his parents, and siblings. He claimed that he had broken with his
criminal past and had adopted a completely different lifestyle, which
included employment and shared responsibility for his children. The
applicant also pointed out that he did not have any ties with Morocco
apart from a three-month holiday spent there with friends in 2016 (he
later submitted a correction that it had been a three-week holiday). He
submitted salary statements from different employers covering 2015,
January and February 2016 and April to October 2017 and a brief
statement dated 7 July 2017 – bearing the name and signature of his
ex-girlfriend – according to which there was a practical arrangement
(afspraak) in place by which he had access to his children at least
every Wednesday afternoon and every other weekend.

.  The applicant waived the opportunity to explain his written comments
at a hearing with the Immigration and Naturalisation Service
(Immigratie- en Naturalisatiedienst), stating that he had already
submitted all the relevant information.

15.  By a decision of 21 November 2017, the Deputy Minister of Justice
and Security (Staatssecretaris van Justitie en Veiligheid, the legal
successor to the Deputy Minister of Security and Justice in these
matters – “the Deputy Minister”) revoked the applicant’s residence
permit with effect from 7 October 2016, issued a return decision with
immediate effect and imposed a ten-year entry ban. The Deputy Minister
noted that the applicant had been convicted in six final judgments of
seven, mostly drug-related, crimes and that he had been sentenced to a
total of sixteen months’ imprisonment. The decision to revoke the
applicant’s residence permit was based on section 3.98 in conjunction
with section 3.86 (4) and (5) of the Aliens Decree 2000
(Vreemdelingenbesluit 2000; see paragraphs 23 and 25 below). The Deputy
Minister acknowledged that those measures constituted an interference
with the applicant’s right to respect for his family life with his two
minor children as laid down in Article 8 of the Convention. However, he
considered the interference justified and noted, inter alia, the
following in that connection:

“... I have also reviewed my decision in the light of the rules that the
European Court of Human Rights has set for this purpose [in] Boultif [v.
Switzerland, no. 54273/00, ECHR 2001-IX] and ... Üner [v. the
Netherlands [GC], no. 46410/99, ECHR 2006-XII] ...

Nature and seriousness of the crime

[Y]ou have been convicted with final effect several times and sentenced
to an unconditional prison sentence. In view of the pattern and gravity
of your crimes, future crimes may still be expected. You committed
serious crimes between 2004 and 2016. You were convicted several times
of violating the Opium Act. With respect to the last [such] conviction
... the court indicated that you were causing harm to public health. You
were held jointly responsible for trafficking in hard drugs and all the
adverse consequences thereof ... for the victims and their immediate
environment [and for] the entire society. These serious infringements of
public order and public health weigh heavily against you. [By committing
those crimes] you caused considerable societal and material damage. In
view of what is known to me, I cannot rule out that you will commit
crimes again.

The duration of the stay in the Netherlands and the solidity of the
alien’s social, cultural and family ties with the Netherlands and the
country of destination

You have now officially resided in the Netherlands for more than
thirty-five years. After such a long stay it is considered that you have
social and cultural ties with the Netherlands. Considering the fact that
... you regularly engaged in serious criminal activities in the period
from 2004 to 2016, no decisive significance can be attached to [those
ties]. The nature, seriousness and number of the criminal offences you
have committed diminish the weight that is to be attributed to your
long-term stay in the Netherlands. ...

As you have been engaged in serious criminal activities during a
relatively short period, you have demonstrated that you have no respect
for public order. Despite the penalties that have been imposed on you,
you have continued to commit criminal offences. This shows that you do
not respect the Dutch legal order either.

Furthermore, it is considered that you were born in Morocco and that you
came to the Netherlands at the age of four. According to the information
before me, your parents also come from Morocco and from them and other
Moroccans in the Netherlands, you have learned about social and cultural
customs in Morocco.

In your written comments you indicated that you went to Morocco [for a
holiday] in 2016. You also indicated that you would have to integrate
[inburgeren] in Morocco. This does not, however, take away from the fact
that it may be expected of you as an adult male that you will be able to
build a new life for yourself [verwacht mag worden dat u als volwassen
man in staat moet zijn een nieuw leven op te bouwen] in Morocco.

The time that has elapsed since the offence was committed and the
alien’s conduct during that period

... Your most recently committed crime of 7 October 2016, of which you
were convicted with final effect, concerned complicity in activities in
violation of the Opium Act. You were sentenced to five months’
imprisonment.

Although you state in your written comments that you have been employed
since 1 September 2017, the salary statements do not indicate that this
is permanent employment. This is insufficient for a decision not to
revoke your residence permit ... The actual risk of a recurrence of your
criminal activity is high.

In view of the great regularity with which you have committed criminal
offences and the number of offences committed, you have not shown that
the punishments have influenced your behaviour. Given your criminal
past, I cannot rule out the possibility that you will not [sic] commit
criminal offences again in the future. All the more so since you have
not shown that you have learned any lessons from the prison sentences
imposed on you.

The nationalities of the various persons concerned

You have two minor children with your ex-girlfriend ... Your minor
children live with your ex-girlfriend. Your children have Dutch
nationality. Your parents, brothers and sister also live in the
Netherlands.

In your written comments you indicated that you are closely involved in
the upbringing of your children. Your children stay with you every other
weekend. You also indicated ... that you want to improve your life and
be there for your children. Your eldest son was born [in] 2008 and the
youngest was born [in] 2014. In view of the ... prison sentences ... it
appears that you have been detained for most of your youngest son’s
life. Neither the prison terms imposed on you nor the fact that you have
been unable to care for your children for extended periods prevented you
from committing further criminal offences.

... You can exercise your right to family life with your children in
Morocco. It is your and your ex-girlfriend’s personal choice to do so.
[...]

Your personal interests must be assessed against the interests of the
Dutch State. Those interests have been carefully weighed up. In this
balancing of interests, I have a certain margin of appreciation. After
weighing up all interests, I conclude that the interference with your
... family life is permitted in the interests of protecting public order
and the prevention of crime.”

16.  As to the imposition of the entry ban, the Deputy Minister, noting
that it was based on section 66a(1)(a) read in conjunction with section
62(2)(c) of the Aliens Act 2000 (see paragraphs 27 and 28 below), stated
the following:

“Because you pose a serious threat to public order, I impose a
[ten-year] entry ban on you. ...

The individual circumstances you have presented are insufficiently
special or serious to justify the imposition of an entry ban of a
shorter duration. [...]

You have been convicted with final effect of seven offences and
sentenced to a total of sixteen months in prison. Those crimes are
listed above. You have continued to commit crimes, which shows that you
have not learned from the punishments that have been imposed on you.

You have been convicted several times with final effect of complicity in
acts in violation of the Opium Act. You have also been convicted of
assault.

In the judgment [of 31 January 2017] regarding complicity in acts in
violation of the Opium Act, the [Regional Court] stated that by
intentionally being in possession of 500 grams of cocaine and
trafficking in that amount of cocaine, large profits from criminal
activity will have been made, dealers supplied, and many users served.
The court held that the use of hard drugs such as cocaine harms public
health. Hard drugs pose great danger to the health of the users. The
court held you partly responsible for the serious damage that has been
done to society, because addicts often resort to criminal activity to
finance their [drug] use.

I have no reason to believe that you will not commit further criminal
offences. This is all the more pressing [dit klemt temeer] as you do not
wish to be heard. You have therefore not given me the opportunity to
assess whether there may have been a positive change in your behaviour.
I can therefore only conclude that there is still a great risk that you
will continue to commit serious crimes. As a result, you still pose a
current, real and serious threat. ...

In view of the nature of the crimes of which you have been convicted, it
is therefore considered that you have several times damaged a
fundamental interest of Dutch society.

You have deliberately committed offences related to hard drugs. Drugs
are a harmful substance for the health of citizens. As a result, you
have caused harm to the fundamental interests of society. It can be
established that the crimes you have committed are of a very serious
nature and that they have seriously upset the legal order [de rechtsorde
ernstig heeft geschokt]. You have also been held partly responsible for
trafficking in hard drugs and all its adverse consequences.

The effects of insecurity, nuisance and social damage are so
far-reaching that it may be concluded that a fundamental interest
[fundamenteel belang] of Dutch society has been harmed.”

.  On 6 December 2017 the applicant objected (bezwaar) to the decision
of 21 November 2017. He reiterated the arguments put forward in his
written comments (see paragraph 13 above) and added that the bond with
his children was much closer, with more regular and frequent contact,
than it had been when he had committed the crimes that had given rise to
the decision. Considering that factor, as well as his long-term
residence and the fact that he had been employed at the time of the
impugned decision, the applicant submitted that the measures in question
were disproportionate.

.  On 27 March 2018 a hearing was held before an official board of
inquiry of the Immigration and Naturalisation Service at which the
applicant and his authorised representative were present. The applicant
later submitted a copy of a letter dated 3 April 2018 in which a former
employer indicated that the applicant would be re-employed under the
same conditions if his residence permit were not revoked.

19.  On 24 May 2018 the Deputy Minister dismissed the applicant’s
objection. In so far as relevant, he held as follows:

“It was found in the decision [of 21 November 2017] that you have family
life with your children, even though you provided insufficient
substantiation for [the existence of] that family life. The grounds for
the objection ..., the additional documents and the content of your
statements have not succeeded in reducing the doubt on my part regarding
the substance [invulling] of your family life. That doubt still exists.
The interference with your family life can take place because of the
breaches [schendingen] of public order committed by you. The
[above-mentioned] decision contains the arguments supporting that
position. ...

... By staying for at least three weeks, you appear to have gotten to
know Morocco again in a certain way. The visit reinforced your knowledge
of Moroccan social and cultural customs, manners and [there], I assume,
you spoke a language commonly used in Morocco.

...

You have not substantiated with objectively verifiable documents why
your personal behaviour has changed. You stated that having a job
constitutes one of the guarantees that you will not commit any more
crimes. However, in the past you have also worked while committing
crimes at the same time. You stated that you have worked at [company 1]
for three years and at [company 2] for one year ..., as well as at
[company 3] ... In 2015 and early 2016 you worked on an agency basis
[uitzendbasis] at [company 4] ... This was all before you worked at
[company 5] and [company 6]. It appears that having a job is no
guarantee that you will stop committing crimes. It appears that you
commit crimes despite and in addition to having a job. You have done
this in particular in the context of drug trafficking. The Regional
Court has also elaborated on this in its judgment [of 31 January 2017;
see paragraph 11 above]. There are many indications ... that you are
involved in drug trafficking [, such as] the way in which your car has
been modified.

Another guarantee that you claim would stop you from committing crimes
is that of taking your family life seriously. It is assumed that you
have a family life, but its substance is unclear. You have not
corroborated in any way that you give any substance, limited or
otherwise, to your family life with your children. ... You have also not
provided corroboration for the financial contributions which you claimed
to make to the upbringing of your children. In short, there is not a
single (objectively verifiable) document that shows genuine contact
[duidelijke omgang] with your children. The fact that you know where
they went to school or which football club they joined is insufficient.

Because you have not further substantiated your arguments with regard to
the reasons why you pose a reduced risk of reoffending, the position
adopted in the [above-mentioned] decision remains unchanged and the
balance of interests will still not be in your favour. ...

To my knowledge, your children are nine and four years old. You have not
provided any information with regard to their physical and emotional
development. However, you have indicated that they go to school and
practise sports. You have not substantiated in any (objective) manner to
what extent you have a bond with your children. You have also not
substantiated with any documents that you have contact with your
children; a note from the mother ... [describing the practical access
arrangement], while it is unknown if that note is indeed from her, is
insufficient. Moreover, the note was written almost one year ago and it
only describes an arrangement with you. Whether you have stuck to the
arrangement is unknown. Furthermore, it is assumed that the mother is
living in the Netherlands and has Dutch nationality[,] that the children
live with her and will be able to continue living with her in the
Netherlands if you have to leave [, and] that the mother has custody.
Therefore, it is not yet assumed that there is such a bond and
relationship of authority that a relationship of dependency exists
between you and your children as a result of which they would be forced
to leave the territory of the [European] Union. ...

The fact that you can go to work and that you (may) have a good
relationship with your children does not mean that you are not capable
of committing criminal acts again. The fact that you had children, for
example, did not prevent you from committing crimes in the past.
Moreover, it is unclear whether your current relationship with your
children differs from the relationship you had with them in the past.

As already noted, having a job has not put a stop to your offences. It
is considered that usually only a positive, independent opinion, such
as, for example, an opinion by the probation and social rehabilitation
service [reclassering], must be submitted in order to accept that you
will no longer commit crimes. ...

Apart from the offences found proven by the [Regional Court in its]
judgment [of 31 January 2017] ... [t]here are indications that you are
involved in drug trafficking. This is strongly held against you and
there are no indications that you have left the drug-trafficking world,
only that you have not committed any more crimes since the previous one.
But that is no guarantee of improvement.

Considering the relatively short time that has passed since your
previous final conviction for a drug offence, the passage of time has
not shown that your personal behaviour has improved. Your criminal
record shows that longer periods of time passed before you were caught
again committing a (drug) offence.”

20.  On 21 June 2018 the applicant lodged an appeal (beroep) against the
decision of 24 May 2018. He reiterated his grounds of objection,
emphasised that he had left Morocco at the age of three and asserted
that he had broken with his criminal past to focus on his family. With
regard to the balancing of interests, the applicant argued that the
impugned measures were disproportionate in view of his long stay in the
Netherlands, his ties with the children and their mother and the absence
of any real ties with Morocco. The applicant argued that the contested
decision had therefore been insufficiently substantiated in view of the
very far-reaching consequences for his children residing in the
Netherlands and of the severing of his family ties with them. The
applicant also submitted a statement from his ex-girlfriend, dated
2 June 2018, in which she described the practical role the applicant
played in their children’s lives, their behavioural changes when they
did not regularly see him and the financial difficulties it would cause
for her and her children to visit him in Morocco.

21.  Following a hearing on 17 January 2019, the Regional Court of The
Hague, sitting in Roermond, dismissed the applicant’s appeal by a
judgment of 12 March 2019. It noted that it was not in dispute between
the parties that family life existed between the applicant and his two
children. Referring to the judgments in the cases of Boultif and Üner
(both cited above), the court noted that in assessing whether Article 8
of the Convention justified the interference with family life in a
particular case, a “fair balance” had to be struck between the interests
of the individual and the general interest of the member State
concerned. It added that, in determining whether the interference with
the applicant’s family life was justified in the interest of public
order, the Deputy Minister had taken into account the “guiding
principles” formulated by the Court. After reiterating the reasoning put
forward by the Deputy Minister in the decisions of 21 November 2017 and
24 May 2018, it held as follows:

“9.  The Regional Court is of the view that, by referring to, inter
alia, the nature and seriousness of the offences committed by [the
applicant] and the relatively short time between his most recent
conviction and the date of the decision [of 21 November 2017]
(approximately ten months), the [Deputy Minister] has provided an
adequate explanation as to why [the applicant] poses a current threat to
public order. It does not appear from [the applicant’s] appeal that his
conduct has changed to such an extent as to warrant the conclusion that
he no longer poses a current, genuine and sufficiently serious threat to
a fundamental interest of society. The fact that [the applicant] has had
a job since 1 September 2017 is insufficient in that context, especially
since it has not been shown that this employment is permanent. The same
is true of the mere assertion that [the applicant] is no longer involved
in criminality. Moreover, [the applicant] has not submitted any
documents, for example a probation report, to support his claim that his
conduct has improved. ...

13.  The Regional Court considers that [the applicant] cannot derive a
right of residence [based on Article 20 of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union] from the ... case-law [of the Court of Justice of
the European Union] because he has not provided evidence to support his
submission that a relationship of dependency exists with his children.
The documents submitted by [the applicant] in this context, namely a
letter from his ex-girlfriend ..., are insufficient for that purpose.
After all, this does not constitute objectively verifiable evidence.

14.  The Regional Court finds that it has not been shown that [the
Deputy Minister] did not take into account all relevant facts and
circumstances in his extensively reasoned weighing of interests.
Furthermore, the Regional Court finds that [the Deputy Minister] has not
wrongly taken the position that the contested decision is in accordance
with the ‘fair balance’. [The Deputy Minister] was therefore entitled to
let the interest of public order prevail over the [applicant’s] interest
in exercising his family life in the Netherlands. [The applicant’s] mere
assertion that he has no ties with Morocco does not constitute cause to
reach a different conclusion.”

22.  By a judgment of 29 August 2019, the Administrative Jurisdiction
Division (Afdeling bestuursrechtspraak) of the Council of State (Raad
van State) found that the applicant’s further appeal did not provide
grounds for quashing the impugned ruling (kan niet tot vernietiging van
de aangevallen uitspraak leiden). Having regard to section 91(2) of the
Aliens Act 2000, no further reasoning was called for, as the arguments
submitted did not raise any questions requiring a determination in the
interests of legal unity, legal development or legal protection in the
general sense. No further appeal lay against that decision.

RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK

REVOCATION OF A RESIDENCE PERMIT OF INDEFINITE DURATION

23.  The minister responsible may revoke a residence permit of
indefinite duration on grounds of public order if the holder has been
convicted by a final court judgment of a criminal offence that is
punishable by a custodial sentence of three years’ imprisonment or more
(section 20(1)(b) read in conjunction with section 22(2)(c) of the
Aliens Act 2000) and if the revocation is in keeping with the “sliding
scale” principle (section 3.98 of the Aliens Decree 2000). The basic
idea behind denying an individual continued residence in accordance with
the sliding scale principle is that the longer an alien has been
lawfully resident in the Netherlands on the basis of a residence permit,
the heavier the sentence imposed must be before such a permit can be
revoked. The sentence is thus assessed on a sliding scale – set out in
section 3.86 of the Aliens Decree 2000 – against the length of the
individual’s period of residence at the time he or she committed the
offence.

.  In the context of the sliding scale, “period of residence” refers to
the uninterrupted period during which the individual had lived in the
Netherlands whilst in possession of a residence permit prior to
committing the offence (section 3.86(6) of the Aliens Decree 2000). The
period of residence after this date is not relevant to the application
of the sliding scale, but it is taken into account when the competing
interests are assessed under Article 8 of the Convention.

25.  Subsection 4 of section 3.86 of the Aliens Decree 2000 provides
that a residence permit of indefinite duration for an alien who has been
convicted of three or more criminal offences can be revoked if the total
length of the non-suspended parts of the custodial sentences imposed is
equal to or more than the threshold set out in subsection 5. For aliens
whose period of residence in the Netherlands is fifteen years or more,
the threshold laid down in subsection 5 is fourteen months’
imprisonment.

.  A non-asylum-based residence permit of indefinite duration cannot be
revoked if removal of the alien would be contrary to Article 8 of the
Convention (section 3.86(17) of the Aliens Decree 2000).

27.  A decision to revoke an alien’s residence permit is considered a
return decision, which means that the alien is no longer legally
entitled to reside in the Netherlands and that he or she must leave of
his or her own volition (section 27(2)(c) in conjunction with section
27(1) of the Aliens Act 2000). This must take place within four weeks
unless the alien has lodged an objection or appeal with suspensive
effect (section 27(3) in conjunction with sections 27(1)(b) and 62 of
the Aliens Act 2000). If an alien poses a threat to public order, public
security or national security, the minister may require him or her to
leave the Netherlands immediately (section 62(2)(c) of the Aliens Act
2000).

IMPOSITION OF AN ENTRY BAN

28.  An entry ban is imposed on aliens who have been required to leave
the Netherlands immediately, provided that they are not nationals of a
European Union member State and their state of health does not make it
inadvisable for them to travel (section 66a(1) of the Aliens Act 2000).

.  Where an entry ban is imposed on an alien who constitutes a serious
threat to public order, public security or national security, its
maximum length is ten years (section 66a(4) of the Aliens Act 2000).
Evidence of such a threat includes a conviction for a violent crime
(geweldsdelict), an offence under the Opium Act (opiumdelict) or an
offence punishable by a custodial sentence of more than six years’
imprisonment (section 6.5a(5) of the Aliens Decree 2000).

.  The period of validity of the entry ban starts to run on the date on
which the alien actually leaves the Netherlands (section 66a(4) of the
Aliens Act 2000).

31.  The imposition of an entry ban on an alien is considered to
constitute an interference with his or her private and family life and
no ban is imposed where this would be contrary to Article 8 of the
Convention; its compatibility with Article 8 must therefore be
considered – within the framework of which a balancing exercise is to be
carried out – before it is imposed (sections B7/3.8.2-3 and A4/2.2 of
the Aliens Act 2000 Implementation Guidelines – Vreemdelingencirculaire
2000).

THE LAW

ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 8 OF THE CONVENTION

32.  The applicant complained of an unjustified interference with his
right to respect for his family life as provided for in Article 8 of the
Convention, which, in so far as relevant, reads as follows:

“1.  Everyone has the right to respect for his ... family life ...

2.  There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and
is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national
security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.”

Admissibility

33.  The Court notes that the application is neither manifestly
ill-founded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35
of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.

Merits

The parties’ submissions

The applicant

.  The applicant submitted that the revocation of his residence permit,
the return decision and the ten-year entry ban had been
disproportionate. The Deputy Minister and the domestic courts had
insufficiently taken into account his and his children’s interests and
had failed to recognise that their interests outweighed the public
interest. In particular, the applicant submitted that the active,
frequent and close involvement he had had (including while detained) and
continued to have in his children’s lives would effectively cease if he
were to be expelled to Morocco. His ex-girlfriend did not have the
financial means to visit him regularly in Morocco, and it could not be
expected of her and the children to give up their lives in the
Netherlands and settle in a country of which they did not have the
nationality and with which they had no ties. The applicant also
submitted that on account of the revocation of his residence permit he
was unable to be gainfully employed in the Netherlands, that he had not
incurred any further criminal convictions and that he had no ties with
Morocco apart from a three‑week holiday in 2016 (see paragraph 13
above). Accordingly, the domestic decisions had to be considered
arbitrary and manifestly unreasonable.

35.  In reply to the Government’s statement of facts and without having
raised this argument in the process of exhausting domestic remedies, the
applicant further submitted that the revocation of his residence permit
had not been in accordance with section 21(4) of the Aliens Act 2000
because he had not been convicted of drug trafficking (handel in
verdovende middelen) and sentenced to more than sixty months’
imprisonment.

The Government

.  The Government took the position that the domestic courts had
thoroughly assessed the applicant’s personal circumstances, carefully
balanced the competing interests on the basis of the relevant criteria
set out in the Court’s case-law and reached findings that were neither
arbitrary nor manifestly unreasonable.

.  With respect to the nature and seriousness of the offences and the
time which had elapsed since the applicant’s last offence, the
Government submitted that he had been convicted of, inter alia, assault
and four drug‑related offences, all of which were considered crimes at
the most serious end of the spectrum. Moreover, it was apparent from the
Maastricht Regional Court’s judgment of 31 January 2017 that there were
indications that the applicant had been involved in drug trafficking
(see paragraph 11 above). The Government further submitted that the
applicant’s assertion that his personal conduct had changed and that his
work and children would guarantee that he remain on the straight and
narrow had remained unsubstantiated.

.  The Government also drew the Court’s attention to the fact that the
applicant had never applied for Dutch nationality, that he had
linguistic, social and cultural ties with Morocco, and that he had to be
considered capable of building a life for himself in that country. The
Regional Court of The Hague had rightly found that no decisive
significance could be attributed to the applicant’s long-term residence
in and social and cultural ties with the Netherlands. His regular
engagement in serious criminal activity from 2004 to 2016 showed a lack
of respect for the Dutch legal order.

39.  With respect to the applicant’s family life with his children, the
Government submitted that the applicant had never acknowledged his
paternity of the eldest child, that he had spent a large part of the
children’s lives in detention, that the children lived with their
mother, who exercised parental authority, and that his expulsion would
have no major effects on the children’s day-to-day lives. As confirmed
by the Regional Court of The Hague, sitting in Roermond, the applicant’s
statements regarding his involvement, limited or otherwise, with his
children and the financial maintenance he contributed had not been
backed up by objective evidence. Moreover, as the Regional Court had
shown, there was no indication that the children were in an exceptional
situation of particular vulnerability or dependency on their father.

.  The Government also pointed out that the entry ban was of a limited
duration of ten years.

.  In response to the applicant’s reliance on section 21(4) of the
Aliens Act 2000 and with reference to a judgment of the Administrative
Jurisdiction Division of the Council of State of 17 June 2020
(ECLI:NL:RVS:2020:1384), the Government noted that section 21(4) governs
the rejection of an application for a residence permit, rather than its
revocation to which section 22 of the Aliens Act 2000 is applicable.

The Court’s assessment

.  The Court reaffirms at the outset that a State is entitled, as a
matter of international law and subject to its treaty obligations, to
control the entry of aliens into its territory and their residence
there. To that end, States have the power to deport aliens convicted of
criminal offences (see, among many other authorities, Abdulaziz, Cabales
and Balkandali v. the United Kingdom, 28 May 1985, § 67, Series A no.
94, and Boujlifa v. France, 21 October 1997, § 42, Reports of Judgments
and Decisions 1997‑VI). The Convention does not guarantee the right of
an alien to enter or to reside in a particular country and, in pursuance
of their task of maintaining public order, Contracting States have the
power to expel an alien convicted of criminal offences. However, an
interference with a person’s private or family life will be in breach of
Article 8 of the Convention unless it can be justified under paragraph 2
of that provision as being “in accordance with the law”, as pursuing one
or more of the legitimate aims listed therein, and as being “necessary
in a democratic society”, that is to say, justified by a pressing social
need and, in particular, proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued
(see Üner v. the Netherlands [GC], no. 46410/99, § 54, ECHR 2006-XII,
and Boultif v. Switzerland, no. 54273/00, § 41, ECHR 2001-IX).

Whether there was an interference with the applicant’s right to respect for his family life

.  The first question to be addressed is whether family life within the
meaning of Article 8 of the Convention existed between the applicant and
his two minor children. Although, as a rule, cohabitation may be a
requirement for such a relationship, exceptionally other factors may
also serve to demonstrate that a relationship has sufficient constancy
to create de facto “family ties”. The existence or non-existence of
“family life” for the purposes of Article 8 is essentially a question of
fact depending upon the real existence in practice of close personal
ties (see L. v. the Netherlands, no. 45582/99, §§ 35-36, ECHR 2004-IV).
In this connection, the Court does not find any indication in the case
file that the applicant has ever cohabited with his children and their
mother, the applicant’s ex-girlfriend. Moreover, the Court observes that
the applicant has acknowledged his paternity of only the youngest son
(see paragraph 8 above) and that he had been detained for most of that
son’s life by the time the Deputy Minister took the decision of
21 November 2017 (see paragraph 15 above). The Court further notes that,
apart from the two statements from his ex-girlfriend (see paragraphs 13
and 20 above) which are not precise as regards the moment from which he
started to engage with his children, no information has been submitted
showing that the applicant had any involvement in his children’s
upbringing prior to the moment that he was notified in June 2017 of the
Deputy Minister’s intention to revoke his permit (see paragraph 12
above) and that there were doubts as regards the substance of his family
life at the relevant time (see paragraph 19 above). The domestic
authorities nevertheless accepted the existence of “family life”. Taken
this into account and noting that the children were born from a genuine
relationship between the applicant and his ex-girlfriend, and that it
was confirmed in the above-mentioned statements that the applicant had
contact with his children, the Court will also accept that there existed
certain ties between the applicant and his minor children which were
sufficient to attract the protection of Article 8 of the Convention and
that the impugned measures interfered with it (see paragraphs 15, 19 and
21 above).

“In accordance with the law”

.  In so far as the applicant’s belated argument based on section 21(4)
of the Aliens Act 2000 (see paragraph 35 above) can be entertained
despite it not having been raised during the process of exhausting
domestic remedies, the Court notes that the measures in question were
taken pursuant to section 20(1)(b) read in conjunction with section
22(2)(c) of the Aliens Act 2000, and to section 66a(1) of the Aliens Act
2000 and section 3.86 of the Aliens Decree 2000 (see paragraphs 23 and
28 above). The interference at issue was thus in accordance with the
law.

“Legitimate aim”

.  The Court accepts that the impugned measures pursued the legitimate
aims of ensuring public safety and preventing disorder or crime (see
Üner, cited above, § 61, and Azerkane v. the Netherlands, no. 3138/16, §
68, 2 June 2020). It remains to be ascertained whether they were also
“necessary in a democratic society” within the meaning of the Court’s
case-law.

“Necessary in a democratic society”

General principles

46.  The relevant criteria for assessing whether the revocation of the
residence permit and the imposition of an entry ban were necessary in a
democratic society and proportionate to the legitimate aims pursued
under Article 8 of the Convention have been laid down by the Court in
its case‑law (see Üner, cited above, §§ 57‑58, and Maslov v. Austria
[GC], no. 1638/03, §§ 68‑76 and 98, ECHR 2008). These criteria are the
following:

–  the nature and seriousness of the offence committed by the applicant;

–  the length of the applicant’s stay in the country from which he or
she is to be expelled;

–  the time elapsed since the offence was committed and the applicant’s
conduct during that period;

–  the nationalities of the various persons concerned;

–  the applicant’s family situation, such as the length of the marriage,
and other factors expressing the effectiveness of a couple’s family
life;

–  whether the spouse knew about the offence at the time when he or she
entered into a family relationship;

–  whether there are children of the marriage, and if so, their age;

–  the seriousness of the difficulties which the spouse is likely to
encounter in the country to which the applicant is to be expelled;

–  the best interests and well-being of the children, in particular the
seriousness of the difficulties which any children of the applicant are
likely to encounter in the country to which the applicant is to be
expelled;

–  the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with the host
country and with the country of destination; and

–  the duration of the exclusion order.

47.  Moreover, for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the
major part of his or her childhood and youth in the host country, very
serious reasons are required to justify expulsion (see Maslov, cited
above, § 75).

48.  The Court reiterates that it has never set a minimum requirement as
to the sentence or seriousness of the crime which ultimately results in
expulsion, nor has it, in the application of all the relevant criteria,
qualified the relative weight to be accorded to each criterion in the
individual assessment (see Khan v. Denmark, no. 26957/19, §§ 68-69, 12
January 2021, and Munir Johana v. Denmark, no. 56803/18, §§ 53-54, 12
January 2021, with further references). That must be decided on a
case-by-case basis, in the first place by the national authorities,
subject to European supervision.

49.  Where an applicant is being expelled as a consequence of a criminal
offence, the Court has considered that this decision first and foremost
concerns him or her and has accepted in the context of the balancing
exercise under Article 8 of the Convention that the family’s interests
may be outweighed by other factors, including the seriousness of the
offence (see Otite v. the United Kingdom, no. 18339/19, § 51, 27
September 2022). It has further tended to consider the seriousness of a
crime in this context not merely by reference to the length of the
sentence imposed but rather by reference to the nature and circumstances
of the particular criminal offence or offences committed by the
applicant in question, and has previously shown understanding of the
domestic authorities’ firmness as regards those actively involved in
drug dealing (see Udeh v. Switzerland, no. 12020/09, § 46, 16 April
2013). And while the Court does not necessarily take the same approach
as regards those convicted of offences related to drug consumption or
possession (see Ezzouhdi v. France, no. 47160/99, § 34, 13 February
2001, and Maslov, cited above, § 80), it must be emphasised that, in
principle, drug-related offences are properly to be viewed as at the
most serious end of the criminal spectrum, given their nature and the
destructive effects they have on society as a whole (see Akbulut v. the
United Kingdom (dec.), no. 53586/08, § 18, 10 April 2012 and Unuane v.
the United Kingdom, no. 80343/17, § 87, 24 November 2020, with further
references). The same can be said of violent offences such as assault
(see Üner, § 63; Unuane, § 87; and Munir Johana, §§ 56-57 and 59, all
cited above). Additional aspects of the totality of a person’s criminal
history which must be taken into account under the criterion of “nature
and seriousness of the offence” are the risk of reoffending (see Ndidi
v. the United Kingdom, no. 41215/14, §§ 29, 78 and 81, 14 September
2017; Levakovic v. Denmark, no. 7841/14, §§ 19 and 44, 23 October 2018;
Azerkane, cited above, §§ 22, 78 and 84; and Munir Johana, cited above,
§§ 56 and 58-59; and compare Udeh, cited above, § 47, and Kolonja v.
Greece (dec.), no. 49441/12, §§ 54 and 57, 19 May 2016), the severity of
the criminal penalty (see Unuane, § 86, and Azerkane, § 73, both cited
above) and whether the offences were committed as a juvenile or as an
adult (see, for example, Maslov, cited above, § 81). The fact that the
offence committed by an applicant was at the more serious end of the
criminal spectrum is not in and of itself determinative of the case but
rather one factor which has to be weighed in the balance, together with
the other criteria which emerge from the judgments in Boultif and Üner
(see Unuane, cited above, § 87).

50.  Lastly, the Court has also consistently held that the Contracting
States have a certain margin of appreciation in assessing the need for
an interference, but that it goes hand in hand with European
supervision. The Court is empowered to give the final ruling on whether
an expulsion measure is reconcilable with Article 8. The competent
national authorities, including the domestic courts, must put forward
specific reasons in the light of the circumstances of the case, not
least to enable the Court to carry out the European supervision
entrusted to it. Where the reasoning of domestic decisions is
insufficient, and the interests in issue have not been weighed in the
balance, there will be a breach of the requirements of Article 8 of the
Convention (see, for instance, I.M. v. Switzerland, no. 23887/16, § 72,
9 April 2019). Where the competent national authorities, including the
domestic courts, have carefully examined the facts, applying the
relevant human rights standards consistently with the Convention and its
case-law, and adequately weighed up the applicant’s personal interests
against the more general public interest in the case, it is not for the
Court to substitute its own assessment of the merits (including, in
particular, its own assessment of the factual details of
proportionality) for that of the competent national authorities. The
only exception to this is where there are shown to be strong reasons for
doing so (see M.A. v. Denmark [GC], no. 6697/18, § 149, 9 July 2021, and
Savran v. Denmark [GC], no. 57467/15, §§ 187-189, 7 December 2021, with
further references).

Application of these principles to the present case

51.  The Court notes that the Dutch authorities took as their legal
point of departure the relevant sections of the Aliens Act 2000, the
Aliens Decree 2000 and, notably, the relevant criteria to be applied in
the proportionality assessment to be conducted in the light of Article 8
of the Convention and the Court’s case-law. The Court recognises that
the Deputy Minister (see paragraphs 15-16 and 19 above) and the Regional
Court of The Hague, sitting in Roermond, (see paragraph 21 above)
thoroughly examined the relevant criteria and were fully aware that very
serious reasons were required to justify the measures taken against the
applicant, a settled migrant who had entered the Netherlands at a very
young age and had lawfully spent most of his childhood and youth in the
host country. The Regional Court’s judgment was upheld by the
Administrative Jurisdiction Division of the Council of State (see
paragraph 22 above). The Court is therefore called upon to examine
whether such “very serious reasons” were adequately adduced by the
national authorities when assessing the applicant’s case.

.  The Deputy Minister and the Regional Court considered it of
significant importance that the applicant had committed crimes at the
most serious end of the spectrum, specifically assault, complicity in
selling heroin and cocaine and four counts of possession of heroin
and/or cocaine. The Court finds that the nature and seriousness of those
offences and their adverse impact on public health and society were
understandably considered by the Deputy Minister to weigh heavily
against the applicant. It was further emphasised that the applicant
continued to reoffend, undeterred by previous convictions and the
sentences imposed on him. Indeed, with convictions for six offences from
2004 until October 2016 (see paragraphs 9-11 above) the applicant
repeatedly showed a lack of will to comply with Dutch law (see, mutatis
mutandis, Miah v. the United Kingdom (dec.), no. 53080/07, § 25,
27 April 2010; Levakovic, cited above, § 44; and Khan, cited above, §
71). Against that background, the Deputy Minister found that there was a
significant risk that he would also commit violent and/or drug‑related
crime in the Netherlands in the future if he were not expelled.

.  The Court cannot rule out that if the sentence of five months’
imprisonment imposed for the crime that triggered the expulsion order
(see paragraph 11 above), viewed in isolation, is lenient, this may
raise an issue under Article 8 and militate against ordering expulsion.
Nevertheless, the Court reiterates that the assessment of
proportionality must be based on a concrete examination of each case,
taking into account all the criteria of relevance as established by the
Court’s case-law, including the totality of the applicant’s criminal
history (see the cases cited in paragraph 49 above). It should also be
taken into account in this connection that member States have differing
legislation, not only in respect of criminal sanctions to be imposed for
various criminal offences, but also as regards the issuing of expulsion
orders (see Khan, cited above, § 70). In some member States, such as the
Netherlands, an expulsion order is issued administratively together with
the revocation of a residence permit, having regard to the overall
criminal behaviour of the alien in question, whereas in other member
States the issue is decided on by the courts in connection with the
criminal proceedings relating to the most recent criminal offence. Thus,
the fact that a convicted long-term settled migrant may be said to have
been given one or more relatively lenient prison sentences – a combined
one year and four months’ imprisonment in the applicant’s case – does
not preclude a finding that an expulsion is, or would be, founded on
important public order interests of the Contracting State (see, mutatis
mutandis, Boughanemi v. France, 24 April 1996, Reports 1996‑II;
Lagergren v. Denmark (dec.), no. 18668/03, 16 October 2006; and Tran v.
Norway (dec.), no. 34029/05, 14 June 2007).

.  In view of the above, the Court can accept the assessment of the
Deputy Minister and the Regional Court according to which the
drug-related offence committed by the applicant in October 2016 was of
such a nature that it had serious consequences for the lives of others
and that it was the last in a series of similar offences.

.  In respect of the criteria “the length of the applicant’s stay in the
country from which he or she is to be expelled” and “the solidity of
social, cultural and family ties” with that country, the Deputy Minister
duly recognised that the applicant had long-lasting ties with the
Netherlands. In this connection the Court reiterates that although the
applicant moved there at a very young age, more than forty years ago,
the length of residence alone has never been a decisive factor for it to
find a violation of Article 8. That provision cannot be construed as
providing absolute protection from expulsion for any category of person
and the length of residence alone should not determine whether there has
been a violation of Article 8 (see Üner, cited above, § 55; Akbulut,
cited above, § 19; and Iyisan v. the United Kingdom (dec.), no. 7673/08,
9 February 2010). Thus, the Court did not find a violation of Article 8
in several cases involving settled migrants who had been convicted of
serious crimes and who had been resident in the host country for more
than twenty years, be it after having entered the country as an adult
(see Akbulut, cited above; Sarközi and Mahran v. Austria, no. 27945/10,
2 April 2015; and Hamesevic v. Denmark (dec.), no. 25748/15, 16 May
2017) or as a young child (see Ndidi, and Levakovic, both cited above)
or after having been born there (see Azerkane, cited above, and Johansen
v. Denmark (dec.), no. 27801/19, 1 February 2022). In view of these
precedents, the Deputy Minister acted within reason when holding that
the nature, seriousness and totality of the criminal offences committed
by the applicant diminished the weight of his long-term residence in the
Netherlands and that no decisive significance could be attached to the
latter.

.  Regarding the criterion “the time [that has] elapsed since the
offence was committed and the applicant’s conduct during that period”,
it is observed that the most recent offence was committed in October
2016 and that the applicant was convicted less than one year later, in
January 2017 (see paragraph 11 above), with the final decision on the
expulsion order and the entry ban being given in August 2019 (see
paragraph 22 above). In view of the applicant’s criminal record – in
particular, as the Deputy Minister and the Regional Court also stressed,
the number of crimes and the time span in which they were committed,
during which period the applicant had children and was employed (see
paragraphs 15 and 21 above) – the national authorities cannot be said to
have acted in an arbitrary or unreasonable manner in finding that there
remained a risk of his reoffending in the future.

.  The Court notes that the applicant has two minor children with Dutch
nationality and that they live with their Dutch mother (the applicant’s
ex-girlfriend) who has custody. The Deputy Minister found that the
applicant had not substantiated the practical manner or intensity of the
contact with his children. It was further emphasised that the applicant
had been detained for a substantial part of his youngest son’s life.
These and other considerations led the Deputy Minister to find that the
applicant’s personal interests did not outweigh the general public
interest. In view of the material before it, the Court sees no cause to
disagree with those findings. Without underestimating the disruptive
effect that the applicant’s expulsion would have on his and his
children’s lives, it is unlikely to have the same impact as it would if
the applicant, his ex-girlfriend and/or their sons had been living
together as a family (see, mutatis mutandis, Onur v. the United Kingdom,
no. 27319/07, §§ 58-59, 17 February 2009; Üner, cited above, § 62; and
Akbulut, cited above, § 23). Moreover, contact by telephone and email
can easily be maintained from Morocco and, apart from the alleged
financial difficulties it would cause (which remained unsubstantiated),
there would be nothing to prevent his children and their mother from
visiting the applicant in Morocco or any other territory not covered by
the entry ban (see also Onur, cited above, § 58; Salem v. Denmark, no.
77036/11, § 81, 1 December 2016; Hamesevic, cited above, §§ 34 and 44;
and Munir Johana, cited above, § 64).

.  The Deputy Minister acknowledged that the applicant had limited ties
with the country of destination but found them sufficient for the
impugned measures. In that context, it was noted, in particular, that he
was a Moroccan national who was familiar with its social and cultural
customs, that he had a command of a language spoken there – which does
not appear to be contested by the applicant – and that as an adult male
he would be able to overcome integration challenges and build a new life
for himself (see also Üner, § 62; Ndidi, §§ 22, 31, 42 and 81; and
Azerkane §§ 15 and 81, all cited above).

.  Lastly, the Court notes that alongside the revocation of the
applicant’s residence permit, a ten-year entry ban was issued. The fact
that such a ban is limited in time is an element to which the Court has
attached importance in its case-law (see Üner, cited above, § 65, and
Azerkane, cited above, § 83).

.  The foregoing considerations enable the Court to conclude that the
competent national authorities, including the domestic courts, carefully
examined the facts and reviewed all the relevant factors which emerge
from the Court’s case-law in detail. Against the background of, in
particular, the seriousness and repetitive nature of the offences
committed, their impact on society as a whole, the lack of proper
substantiation of the applicant’s interaction with his children at the
relevant time and his social and cultural ties with Morocco, and
considering the sovereignty of States to control and regulate the
residence of aliens on their territory, the Court accepts that the
domestic authorities adequately balanced the applicant’s right to
respect for his family life against the State’s interests in public
safety and in preventing disorder and crime (contrast I.M. v.
Switzerland, cited above, § 78, and El Ghatet v. Switzerland, no.
56971/10, §§ 52-53, 8 November 2016). It cannot find that the respondent
State attributed excessive weight to its own interests in deciding to
revoke the applicant’s residence permit and impose a ten-year entry ban.
The Court therefore concludes that the respondent State has not
overstepped the margin of appreciation afforded to it in the present
case.

.  Accordingly, the applicant’s expulsion and the implementation of the
entry ban would not be in violation of Article 8 of the Convention.

FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT, UNANIMOUSLY,

Declares the application admissible;

Holds that the applicant’s expulsion and the implementation of the entry
ban would not be in violation of Article 8 of the Convention.

Done in English, and notified in writing on 11 April 2023, pursuant to
Rule 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court.

Milan Blaško Pere Pastor Vilanova
Registrar President
